# Folder structure

This folder contains the chapters and appendixes of my PhD thesis. A short 
description of each `*.tex` file is presented bellow.

## chap00

**Title**: General introduction

**Description**: This chapter contains the general introduction of the thesis.

**Structure**: The *General introduction* is subdivided in two sections, each 
with three subsections:

* Background and motivation
  - Demand for soil information
  - Modern soil mapping
  - Sources of uncertainty
* Content of the thesis
  - Objectives and research questions
  - Study area and database
  - Outline

## chap01

**Title**: Do more detailed covariates deliver more accurate soil maps?

**Description**: This chapter is composed by the article published in Geoderma 
as is. There are no changes in the content. The only changes regard to the 
orientation and position of tables and figures.

## chap02

**Title**: Optimization of sample configurations for spatial trend estimation 
for soil mapping

**Description**: The work that will compose this chapter is in the final 
development phase. Please ignore the current content of the file.

## chap03

**Title**: Sampling for digital soil mapping in *terra incognita*

**Description**:The work that will compose this chapter is in the final 
development phase. Please ignore the current content of the file.

## apena

**Title**: Database description

**Description**: This appendix contains a description of the database used to 
develop my PhD research project. The original idea was to give a full account 
of all processing steps given till the data was ready to use. However, due to
time constraints, such a through description has not been completed yet. I have
asked for help from two colleagues who participated in the construction of the
database -- unfortunately they had not much time available to contribute.

## apenb

**Title**: R-package spsann: Optimization of Sample Configurations using 
Spatial Simulated Annealing

**Description**: This appendix contains a description of the **spsann**-package
for R. Most of the content was originally produced to compose the package 
documentation. The original idea was to simply add the package documentation as
is. However, because the package documentation is already published, and its 
content is more technical, I came to the conclusion that adding the package 
documentation as was not a good idea.

## apenc

**Title**: R-package pedometrics: Pedometric Tools and Techniques

**Description**: This appendix contains a description of the features of the 
**pedometrics**-package for R. Like in the previous appendix, the original idea
of simply adding the package documentation as is was rejected. I now try to
give an overview of what can be done with the **pedometrics**-package, avoiding
going into mush detail like in the previous appendix.

